Relays support within MoQ Architecture (#67)
kixelated/warp-draft: draft-lcurley-warp.md

Objects MUST synchronize frames within and between tracks using presentation timestamps within the container.
Objects are NOT REQUIRED to be aligned and the decoder MUST be prepared to skip over any gaps.

# Relays

The Relays play an important role for enabling low latency media 
delivery within the Warp/MOQ architecture. This specification allows 
for the delivery protocol based on a publish/subscribe metaphor 
where client endpoints, called publishers, publish media objects and 
subscribers consume those media objects that is sent to, and received 
from relays, that forms an overlay delivery network similar/in-parallel 

> to what CDN provides today. 

Reviewer: +1

The subscribe messages allow subscription to aspects of Media Represenations
that enable matching to multiple published Media Objects, so a single subscribe 

> can allow a client to receive publishes for a wide class of media objects. 

Reviewer: "wide class of media objects" is more general. An detailed example would be helpful.

> The subscribe messages allow subscription to aspects of Media Represenations
> that enable matching to multiple published Media Objects, so a single subscribe 
> can allow a client to receive publishes for a wide class of media objects. 
> Media Objects are identified such that it is unique for the relay/delivery 
> network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subscribe messages allow subscription to aspects of Media Represenations
that enable matching to multiple published Media Objects, so a single subscribe 
can allow a client to receive publishes for a wide class of media objects. 
Media Objects are identified such that it is unique for the relay/delivery 
network.
```
A subscribe message instructs a relay to forward to the client all objects matching the subscription identifier. Typically this sequence of objects will comprise a media track. Each media object carries identifiers which, when concatenated, uniquely identify that object across all nodes of the delivery network.

> Relays provide several benefits including

Reviewer 3: I'm sort of missing your point here. It sounds like you are saying we don't need relays. We do need relays and I think we need to describe architecturally how they fit in and how they work and what they accomplish. I'm not arguing that this way of doing relays or anything is the right way, but just that we do need sort out how this works in the draft.

> Relays provide several benefits including

Reviewer 3: As a side note, I don't see the origin in HTTP the same way you do. The whole point of todays HTTP CDNs today seem like it is to remove the origin from being involved in any ached request.  I understand this might be semantics in that the DNS moved the origin to the CDN, but I think it is the similar in that all we are really talking about is the relays have a business relationship with someone, and that someone authorizes the clients.  That someone got called origin but perhaps there is a better name.  One way or another, I don't see any way to avoid something like this.

* Scalability – Relays provide the fan-out necessary to scale up 
                streams to production levels (millions) of concurrent 
                subscribers.

> * Reliability - Reliability is achieved by providing alternate paths for 
>                routing content, relays can improve the overall reliability 
>                of the delivery system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Reliability - relays can improve the overall reliability 
               of the delivery system by providing alternate paths for 
               routing content.
```

* Performance – Relays are usually positioned as close to the edge of a 
                network as possible and are well-connected to each other 
                and to the Origin via high capacity managed networks. This 
                topography minimizes the RTT over the unmanaged last 
                mile to the end-user, improving the latency and throughput 

>                 compared to the client connecting directly to the origin.'

Reviewer 4: I have thoughts. 

- I agree with @xdfy's suggestion that we provide details on various types of relays.
- As I understand the charter, we have (at least)  

> The working group will define MoQ so that the media publication protocol can leverage **coordinating relays, caches, or replication points** wherever applicable to improve the delivery performance

I'm trying to understand the subtleties between "relays", "caches", and "replication points", especially given that the charter also talks about 

> * rate adaptation strategies based on changing codec rates, changing chosen media encoding/qualities, or other mechanisms

and I'm guessing people are thinking these rate adaptation strategies could happen somewhere between the origin server and the ultimate media consumer. 

I'm trying to describe network entities in the requirements draft (as part of resolving [issue #81](https://github.com/fiestajetsam/draft-gruessing-moq-requirements/issues/81) there), and I'm finding myself making assumptions that I shouldn't be making on my own. 

- has there been a discussion about the specifics of relays that I missed (that's **certainly** possible)?

* Security –    Relays act to shield the origin from DDOS and other 
                malicious attacks.

## Relay - Subscriber Interactions

Subscribers interact with "MoQ Relays" by sending subscriptions to
aspects of media representations within a WarpMediaSession. Relays 
forward the published media objects to the subscribers matching the
`SubscrptionId` in the subscribe request. However, Relays MUST be 
willing to act on behalf of the subscriptions before they can 
forward the media, which implies that the subscriptions MUST to be
authorized.

Relays need to validate subscriptions in order to ensure the 
protect against the malicious uses of the Relay resources (compute & storage). 
Relays can be configured by the application, in one of the 
following modes allowing them to participate in the media delivery

1. Subscriptions carry enough authorization information, for the
   Relays to authorize the subscription.

2. Relays forward the received subsciptions towards the Origin 
   for completing the authorization process. This 
   may involve sending the messages directly to the Origin Relay or

>    possibly traverse another Relay. 

Author: @xdfy yes that is totally possible based on the architecture/topology of the Relay network. The cases that I am aware of, do the authz at the entry network (edges) primarily.  The draft needs to talk about how pub/sub gets authorized within the moq exchange. I am happy to get more feedback on the exact text or suggestions to address the same.

In all the scenarios, the end-point client making the subscribe request is
notified of the result of the subscription, wherever applicable.

> For cases where the subscriptions are successfully validated, 
> Relay proceeed to save the subscription information by maintaining the mapping 
> from the `SubscriptionId`s to the list of subscribers. This will enable 
> Relays to forward on-going publishes (live or from cache) to the subscribers, 
> if available, and also forward all the future publishes, until the subscriptions
> cases to exist. Relays make such forwarding and/or caching decisions, 
> based on match of the "MediaObjectId" against the list of subscriber.
> Such a match can be a partial or full match against the `SubscriptionId`
> depending on the implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successful validation of a subscription request, the relay saves the subscription by maintaining a mapping of the (Broadcast URI,track ID) tuple against the WebTransport connection associated with each subscriber. 
This enables relays to forward matching cached objects if available as well as all future matching media objects. 
```

Subscriptions received can be aggregated at the Relays. When a relay receives 
a publish request with data, it will forward it both towards the 
Origin and to any clients or relays that have a matching subscriptions. 
This "short circuit" of distribution by a relay before the data has even 
reached the Origin servers provides significant latency reduction for clients 

> closer to the relay

Reviewer 2: Most RTC applications follow a centralized SFU or MCU model in which all published media is forwarded to an origin. This enables a host of features such as billing, access control, content validation, caption generation, object extraction, text-to-speech etc. If a relay directly routes a published object to a subscriber without passing it through the origin, then those features cannot be enabled.

Reviewer 5: Here you force the RTC application to have a centralized Origin. It should be optional imho.

Another solution: the Origin can be regarded as a Relay, which is free to subscribe to any Media Representation. That is, no need to define a special Origin object, nor to implement any specific policy for forwarding. Origin would receive any new Media Object as part of its subscription.

Side note: "significant" is not necessary in the last sentence.

Reviewer: I agree the Origin should be optional. Origin is just another relay. The topology and the policy of the relay should be left to relay service provider to determine.

## Relay - Publisher Interactions

Publisher endpoints represent media sources with in the WARP architecture
and they publish "Media Objects" as part of WarpMediaStreams within a given 
WarpMediaSession.

Publishers MAY be configured to publish the media objects to a "MoQ Relay" based 
on the application configuration and topology. Like with subscriptions, the 
publishes MUST be authorized by the Origin and the Relays MUST be willing to 
forward the published media objects.

> Publishers begin with publishing "Catalog" messages that idenitfies the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Publishers begin with publishing "Catalog" messages that identify the 
```

various representations/WarpMediaStreams that the publisher is willing 
to publish the media objects on. The "Catalog" messages MUST be 

> authorized in of the following wyas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
authorized in one of the following ways
```

1. "Catalog" message carries enough authorization information, for the
   Relays to authorize the WarpMediaStreams advertised.
   todo: add details on sender-constrainted auth token

2. Relays forward the received Catalog messaage towards Origin, 
   for completing the authorization process. This may involve sending the 

>    messages directly to the Origin or possibly traverse another Relay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   messages directly to the Origin or possibly traversing another Relay.
```

Once the Catalog message is authorized, Relay would be willing to 

> participate in forwarding the published media objects whose "MediaObjectId"
> prefix matches the WarpStreamId in the Catalog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participate in forwarding the published media objects whose Broadcast URI and Track ID 
matches the Broadcast URI and Track ID specified in the Catalog. 
```

Author: @wilaw  Having Broadcast URI in every packet is wastage of bits and also redundant information and the same can be differently represented when using streams too

 I would encourage MOQ WG to think about how do we avoid this redundancy.

Reviewer 2: I agree that a UTF8 URI  is unnecessarily verbose in every segment. If it was a number it would be more concise and equally functional. We do need a unique identifier in every object. We can't scope uniqueness to streams or Webtransport sessions, because then relays will need to open new Webtransport connections for every new Broadcast ID. For UGC streaming across different providers, there could be hundreds of thousands of unique broadcasts that a delivery system must route. It cannot keep that many WT sessions open between every node pair. We should definitely discuss this at the interim.

Author: The spec needs to say , what I am calling "WarpStreamId" is globally unique and some notes on the same. Agree we need to add some text to that extent.

Reviewer 6: > We can't scope uniqueness to streams or Webtransport sessions, because then relays will need to open new Webtransport connections for every new Broadcast ID

WebTransport session is different than a connection, and there's not really a definition of a WebTransport connection (maybe a new HTTP connection with a single WebTransport session?).  Opening multiple WebTransport sessions within a single connection shouldn't be cryptographically expensive.  Mostly it creates server side state mapping a QUIC stream ID to a URL.

Reviewer 7: > I agree that a UTF8 URI  is unnecessarily verbose in every segment. If it was a number it would be more concise and equally functional. We do need a unique identifier in every object. We can't scope uniqueness to streams or Webtransport sessions, because then relays will need to open new Webtransport connections for every new Broadcast ID. For UGC streaming across different providers, there could be hundreds of thousands of unique broadcasts that a delivery system must route. It cannot keep that many WT sessions open between every node pair. We should definitely discuss this at the interim. 

If nodes exchanged HTTP messages, header compression (HPACK, QPACK) could address URI overhead.  Similar approach could be applied in MoQ objects, MPACK anyone ;)

The Relay keeps an outgoing queue of objects to be sent to the 
each subscriber and objects are sent in strict priority/delivery order. 
Relays MAY cache some of the information for short period of time and 
the time cached may depend on the application and also by the local 
cache policies.

> Relays makes use of priority/delivery order and other metadata properties 
> from the published media objects to make forward or drop decisions when 
> reacting to congestion as indicated by the underlying QUIC stack. 
> The same can be used to make caching decisions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relays makes use of the Object Delivery Order specified in each Object's header to make forward or drop decisions when reacting to congestion in the underlying QUIC stack. 
The same data can be used to make caching decisions.
```

Author: @wilaw  There is still an open discussion on priority and delivery order. Priority can be mapped to delivery order at the QUIC priority level .. Hence I had made it generic for now

## Relay Discovery and Failover

> Relays are discovered via application defined ways that is out of scope of this 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relays are discovered via application defined ways that are out of scope of this 
```

document. A Relay that wants to shutdown can send a message to the client with 
the address of new relay. Client moves to the new relay with all of its 
Subscriptions and then Client unsubscribes from old relay and closes connection to it.

## Implementation Considerations

A relay that reads from a stream and writes to stream in order will introduce head-of-line blocking.
Packet loss will cause stream data to be buffered in the QUIC library, awaiting in order delivery, which will increase latency over additional hops.

> To mitigate this, a relay SHOULD read and write QUIC stream data out of order subject to flow control limits.

Reviewer 2: How would it READ out of order? Sending priority with QUIC does not control receipt order

Author: @wilaw Yes ,  I am not sure of it. I would be OK to remove it ..

Reviewer 6: mvfst has a peek API that allows the application to see any data received that can't be delivered yet due to head-of-line blocking.
